# VINDTA functions

`.vindta` contains wrappers of the functions in the [solve](../solve) and [calibrate](../calibrate) modules that may be more convenient to use when your titration data is in the format typically generated by [a VINDTA instrument](http://www.marianda.com/index.php?site=products&subsite=vindta3c).

## What format is that?

A VINDTA spits out a text file with the extension '.dat' for each titration that usually looks something like this (with extra rows in place of the `...`):

    bottle	CRM-144-0435-4	0	0	0	0	0.00	0.00	35.000	4.000	0.00	0.0
    24.857	35.000	0.000	0.000
    0.000	187.600	24.857
    0.150	209.350	24.855
    0.300	236.800	24.857
    ...     ...     ...
    3.750	483.800	24.862
    3.900	486.350	24.865
    4.050	488.650	24.862

The first two lines contain various bits of user-inputted information about the sample. Other than skipping past them to the titration data, these lines are totally ignored by Calkulate.

The rest of the file has a row for each acid addition step in the titration. The space- or tab-separated columns are:

  1. Volume of acid added in ml;
  2. Measured EMF of the sample + acid mixture in mV;
  3. Temperature of the sample + acid mixture in °C.

If you organise your titration data from any source into this format, you can use the functions in this module to work with it in Calkulate.

## Generic syntax

There are two functions in this module corresponding to each of the alkalinity-solving methods available in module [solve](../solve): one to solve for alkalinity where acid concentration is known, and one to solve for acid concentration where alkalinity is known. The syntaxes are:

```python
# Solve for acid concentration:
OptimizeResult = calk.vindta.methodCRM(datfile, Vsamp, AT_cert, psal, CT, PT,
    burette_cx=1, tempKforce=None)
# Solve for alkalinity:
OptimizeResult = calk.vindta.method(datfile, Vsamp, Cacid, psal, CT, PT,
    burette_cx=1, tempKforce=None)
```

## `.prep` - import and prepare for Calkulate

Imports a single .dat file and does some preliminary calculations assuming a typical open ocean seawater composition.

You probably won't need to use this function yourself, as it is used internally by the other functions in this module.

**Syntax:**

```python
massAcid, emf, tempK, massSample, XT, KXF = calk.vindta.prep(datfile, volSample,
    psal, CT, PT, SiT, buretteCorrection=1, tempKForce=None)
```

**Inputs:**

  * `datfile` - the file name (and path) to the .dat file;
  * `Vsamp` - sample volume before acid addition in ml;
  * `psal` - sample practical salinity;
  * `CT` - sample dissolved inorganic carbon in mol/kg;
  * `PT` - sample phosphate in mol/kg;
  * `SiT` - sample silicate in mol/kg;
  * `burette_cx` - optional, multiplicative correction factor for the volume of the burette that delivers acid to the titration cell (defaults to `1`);
  * `tempKforce` - optional, average temperature of the titration in K - if not `None` (the default) then this overrides whatever temperature data is in the .dat file.

**Outputs:**

  * `massAcid` - acid mass in kg;
  * `emf` - titration EMF in mV;
  * `tempK` - titration temperature in K;
  * `massSample` - sample mass before acid addition in kg;
  * `XT` - dict of concentrations (generated using the `XT` function in module [concentrations](../concentrations));
  * `KXF` - dict of dissociation constants (generated using the `KXF` function in module [dissociation](../dissociation)).
